Dataset endpoints improvements (#125)
resource-watch/doc-api: source/includes/api/_dataset.md

# Dataset

## What is a dataset?

If you are new to the RW API, or want to learn more about the concept of a dataset, we strongly encourage you to read the [dataset concept](#dataset) documentation first. It gives you a brief and clear description of what a dataset is, and what it can do for you.

> Once you've read that section, you can come back here to learn more details about using the RW API's datasets feature. The RW API is home to many datasets uploaded by [WRI](https://www.wri.org/), its partner organizations, or by API users like you. These datasets contain a lot of information about a wide range of topics that you may want to learn about or build on top of. To find out more about finding and accessing the datasets already available on the RW API, check out the documentation on [getting datasets](#getting-all-datasets).

Reviewer: Should we add some information here about exploring the available datasets on RW itself, then getting the id from dataset details and coming back here?

> You can also [create you own datasets](#creating-a-dataset) on the RW API, if you'd like to share your data with the world, or 

Reviewer: **Important:** Need to note here that all data posted to the API is publicly available.

Reviewer 2: I added this on the dataset creation section

 if you are looking to use the RW API and its features to gain insights into your data.

## Getting all datasets

This endpoint will allow you to get the list of the datasets available in the API, and it's a great place for new users to start exploring the RW API. By default, this endpoint will give you a paginated list of 10 datasets. In the sections below, we'll explore how you can customize this endpoint call to match your needs. 

```shell

> curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset

Reviewer: We need documentation here for the schema of the dataset object. Fortunately, should be similar to the search attributes table below.

Reviewer 2: so this is a simple question with two very different answers: do we want to have per-endpoint schemas, or a more global, complete one?
- if we go with a per-endpoint approach, we'll basically be duplicating a lot of info, and making it more troublesome to update. It will also mean we're more prone to errors going forward
- the approach I'd like to try is to centralize this in a single place (the newly added "dataset reference" section) and then point users to it from the different endpoints. It's a bit less accurate as, for example, the reference may have fields that are not exposed on gets, or that may only for internal usage only. 

Let me know if you prefer the first approach instead

Reviewer: Second approach makes more sense to me. But let's link it from here

## What is a Dataset?

> If you are new to the RW API, or want to learn more about the concept of a dataset, we strongly encourage you to read the [dataset concept](#dataset) documentation first. It gives you a brief and clear description of what a dataset is, and what it can do for you.

Reviewer: Nice...this is helpful.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

> ### Pagination

Reviewer: This section may be worth moving to a more general place than under the `/dataset` endpoint specifically. @tiagojsag are our pagination mechanisms standardized enough to do that?

Reviewer 2: Ideally yes, in practice, not sure. My suggestion is that we keep going through all MSs, copy-paste and validate as we go, and when we get to the end, if there's enough consistency, we refactor the docs (should be quick enough)

Reviewer: Okay that sounds good to me. I'll add a task in JIRA so we don't forget.

page[number] |       The page number        | Number | 1

### Search

> Search for datasets

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?search=wind
```

The dataset service offers a simple yet powerful search mechanism that will help you look for datasets. The query argument `search` allows you to specify a search string that will match:

- The dataset name.
- The dataset's metadata name.
- The dataset's metadata description.
- The [relational graph](#graph) node list.

### Filters

> Filtering datasets

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?name=birds&provider=cartodb
```

> Matching vocabulary tags

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?vocabulary[legacy]=umd
```

The dataset list provides a wide range of parameters that you can use to tailor your dataset listing. Most of these parameters reflect fields you'll find in a dataset itself, while others are convenience filters for things like user role or favourites. These parameters can be combined into a complex `and` logic query.

Here's the comprehensive list of filters supported by datasets:
 

> Filter         | Description                                                                  | Type        | Expected values

Reviewer: Missing some descriptions here. These need to be filled in. @ikas let me know if you need more time to track down some of these and I can make a separate task for it to return to later.

Reviewer 2: Actually I was the one doing this. I already made some changes to improve this, but I think the main one here is the link to "dataset reference" at the top. Ultimately, I don't think it's useful to explain how a filter by fieldX works, I think we should explain what fieldX is, and the user can infer from there.

-------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
name           | Filter returned datasets by the name of the dataset.                         | String      | any valid text
slug           | Filter returned datasets by the slug of the dataset.                         | String      | any valid text
type           | Filter returned datasets by dataset type.                                    | String      | any valid text
subtitle       | Filter returned datasets by dataset subtitle.                                | String      | any valid text
application    | Applications associated to this dataset.                                     | Array       | any valid text

> applicationConfig |                                                                           | Object      | `true` or `false`

Reviewer: Why is this `Object` and not `Boolean`?

Reviewer 2: Should be boolean. The field itself is an object, but the way the filters are built is that Objects are filtered by a bool that says if they are empty or not.

provider       | Dataset provider this include inner connectors and 3rd party ones            | String      | [Check the available providers when creating a dataset](index-rw.html#creating-a-dataset)
connectorUrl   |                                                                              | String      | any valid text
sources        |                                                                              | Array       | any valid text
tableName      |                                                                              | String      | any valid text
userId         | Filter results by the owner of the dataset. Does not support regexes.        | String      | valid user id
status         | Filter results by the current status of the dataset.                         | String      | `pending`, `saved` or `failed`
overwrite      | If the data can be overwritten (only for being able to make dataset updates) | Boolean     | `true`or `false`
verified       | If this dataset contains data that is verified using blockchain              | Boolean     | `true`or `false`

> errorMessage   | If this dataset contains data that is verified using blockchain              | String      | any valid text

Reviewer: Description is wrong for `errorMessage` and `mainDateField`.

Reviewer 2: fixed

collection     | Filter returned datasets collection id. Does not support regexes.            | String      | any valid text
favourite      | Filter by favourited datasets. See [this section](#favorites) for more info. Does not support regexes. | String      | any valid text

Please keep in mind the following:

- String types support and expect a regex value, unless detailed otherwise on the `Description` field. Although typically they will match exact strings, you may have to escape certain characters (PCRE v8.42 spec).
- Array types support multiple values. Use `,` as an `or` multi-value separator, or `@` as a multi-value, exact match separator.
- Object types expect a boolean value, where `true` matches a non-empty object, and `false` matches an empty object.

### Sorting

#### Basics of sorting

> Sorting datasets

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?sort=name
```

> Sorting datasets by multiple criteria

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?sort=name,description
```

> Sort by name descending, description ascending

```shell

> curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?sort=-name,%2Bdescription

Reviewer 3: Is the `+` supposed to be URL encoded?

Reviewer 2: technically, everything is supposed to be encoded. I added a new section, "about these docs", which covers this, among other things. In it, we say that examples are shown unencoded, for readability, but that users should always encode their URLs before issuing requests to the API

curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?sort=user.role
```

The API currently supports sorting by means of the `sort` query parameter. Sorting can be done using any field from the dataset data model, as well as `user.name` and `user.role` (sorting by user data is restricted to ADMIN users). Sorting by nested fields is not supported at the moment.

Multiple sorting criteria can be used, separating them by commas.

> You can also specify the sorting order by prepending the criteria with either `-` or `+`. By default, `asc` order is assumed.

Reviewer: Which one is which?

#### Special sorting criteria

> Sorting datasets with special criteria

> 

Reviewer: In the example, should be `most-favorited`, not `-most-favorited`, right? If not, this needs explanation.

Reviewer 2: both are valid, this will be clarified in my upcoming changes

}
```

> Loading layers for the given dataset

```shell
curl -X GET http://api.resourcewatch.org/dataset?includes=layer
```

> Loading the information about the user who authored the dataset

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?includes=user
```

When fetching datasets, you can request additional entities to be loaded. The following entities are available:

* `widget` - loads all widgets associated with a given dataset.
* `layer` - loads all layers associated with a given dataset.
* `vocabulary` - loads all vocabulary entities associated with a given dataset.
* `metadata` - loads all metadata associated with a given dataset.
* `user` - loads the name, email address and role of the author of the dataset. If you do not issue this request as an ADMIN user, or if no user data is available, the `user` object will be empty.

**Note:** If you include related entities (e.g. layers) with query filters, the filters will not cascade to the related entities.

## Getting a dataset by id or slug

> Getting a dataset by id:

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/51943691-eebc-4cb4-bdfb-057ad4fc2145
```

> Getting a dataset by slug:

```shell

> curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/Timber-Production-RDC-test-1490086842132

Reviewer 3: Trivial, but maybe we can pick a more representative dataset, not one with the name `test` in it.

```

Special search criteria must be used as sole sorting criteria, as it's not possible to combine any of them with any other search criteria. The following criteria can be used for special sorting in datasets:

* `metadata`: delegates sorting to the metadata component, sorting by the name field of the metadata.
* `most-viewed` delegates sorting to the graph component, sorting by the datasets that have been queried more frequently. Supports ascending/descending order.
* `most-favorited`: delegates sorting to the graph component, sorting by the datasets that have been more favorited. Supports ascending/descending order.
* `relevance`: delegates sorting to the metadata component, sorting by the datasets which metadata better match the search criteria. Can only be used in conjunction with a `search` parameter. Does not support ascending order.

### Include related entities

> Loads metadata and widgets associated with each dataset:

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset?includes=metadata,widget
```

```json
{
    "data": [
        {
            "id": "06c44f9a-aae7-401e-874c-de13b7764959",
            "type": "dataset",
            "attributes": {

>                 "name": "Historical Precipitation -- U.S. (Puget Sound Lowlands)",

Reviewer: Can probably trim this response to focus on the relevant information.

}
```

> When fetching the dashboards, you can request additional entities to be loaded with the datasets. The following entities are avaliable:

Reviewer: What's this about dashboards?

* `widget` - loads all widgets associated with a given dataset.
* `layer` - loads all layers associated with a given dataset.
* `vocabulary` - loads all vocabulary entities associated with a given dataset.
* `metadata` - loads all metadata associated with a given dataset.
* `user` - loads the name, email address and role of the author of the dataset. If you do not issue this request as an ADMIN user, or if no user data is available, the `user` object will be empty.

**Note:** If you include related entities (e.g. layers) with query filters, the filters will not cascade to the related entities.

### Verification

> Get verification information for a dataset

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/:datasetID/verification
```

> Example response

```shell
[
    {
        "id": "string",
        "hash": "string"
    }
]
```

When available, the content of the `blockchain` field is used to validate the dataset's information using [Stampery](https://stampery.com/).

> ### Flush dataset cache

Reviewer: What does this actually mean?

- All data uploaded to the RW API will be publicly visible and available to other users. 

The first thing to consider when creating a dataset is where your data currently is - this will determine the [Dataset provider](#dataset-providers) you will need to use and, with it, a set of things you need to take into account - we'll cover each provider in detail shortly. When building your request to the RW API to create your dataset, you will need to take into account both the general details that follow, plus the details for the `provider` you are using. Be sure to review both sections when creating your datasets, to avoid any pitfalls.

Creating a dataset is done using a POST request and passing the relevant data as body files. The supported body fields are as defined on the [dataset reference](#dataset-reference) section, but the minimum field list you must specify for all datasets is:

- name
- application
- connectorType
- provider 

Additionally, depending on the data provider you will be using, other fields may be required - we'll cover those in detail in each provider's specific documentation.

> A successful dataset creation request will return a 200 HTTP code, and the dataset details as stored on the RW API. PAy special attention to the `id` or the `slug`, as those will allow you to [access your dataset](#getting-a-dataset-by-id-or-slug) later.

Reviewer 3: I think, you should also clarify here, that in most cases, "creating" a dataset means, that you reference a remote source. Only for selected providers users will create/ host an actual dataset in the API.

Providers should be hence categoried into read-only and read/write providers

Reviewer 3: It would also be good to have an overview table on what you can do with datasets from different providers and where the difference are. Probably not in this document but rather in the dataset-concept section

Reviewer 2: Added a new section on the "concept" part about this.

#### Errors for creating a dataset

Error code     | Error message  | Description
-------------- | -------------- | --------------
400            | `<field>`: `<field>` can not be empty | Your are missing a required field value.
400            | `<field>`: empty or invalid `<field>` | The provided value for `<field>` is invalid. This is usually happens if an invalid value type is provided, but certain fields use more advanced validation rules, that may produce this error message if validation fails (ie: on a carto dataset, the `connectorUrl` must contain a valid carto URL). 

> 400            | provider: must be valid [cartodb, featureservice, gee, bigquery, rasdaman, nexgddp, loca] | Your `provider` value is invalid.

Reviewer 3: Trivial, but provider list is incomplete

Reviewer 2: This list will vary depending on the connectorType. I'll add this info to the docs

`provider`      | The provider should be set to `featureservice`.                                        | `featureservice` |
`connectorUrl`  | The URL for the JSON data in ArcGIS services this dataset will be using.               | https://services.arcgis.com/uuid/arcgis/rest/services/example/FeatureServer/0?f=json |

The RW API will use the information above to directly query the ArcGIS Feature Service Server specified on the `connectorUrl` field whenever this dataset is accessed on the RW API. This has a few implications that you should be aware of:

- The ArcGIS Feature Service URL provided will be publicly visible to all RW API users.
- The ArcGIS Feature Service server will see increased traffic.
- Any changes made to the data hosted on ArcGIS Feature Service will be automatically reflected on the data served by the RW API for this dataset.
- If you restructure or delete your ArcGIS Feature Service dataset, the corresponding RW API dataset will be in an invalid state, and you should delete it.

The `tableName` value of a ArcGIS-based dataset will automatically be filled with the name of the ArcGIS Feature Service table corresponding to the dataset.

> When creating a ArcGIS-based dataset, the RW API will try to validate the `connectorUrl` by trying to connect to the corresponding ArcGIS server - the result of this will determine if the dataset's status will be set to `saved` or `error`.

Reviewer 3: Technically, we reference an `ArcGIS Feature Layer`. The Feature layer can be part of an `ArcGIS Feature Service` or an `ArcGIS Map Service`. Both Feature and Map Service will serve 1 to many layers. Layers are indexed and their id is the last number in the URL path. We can only register one layer per dataset.

Reviewer 3: Layers can be hosted on ArcGIS online or an ArcGIS enterprise server

Reviewer 2: Updated the docs to mention feature layer instead.

### WMS

> Example of creating a dataset based on WMS data with the minimum fields required

```shell
curl -X POST 'https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset' -d \
-H 'Authorization: Bearer <your-token>'  \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d \
'{
   "dataset": {
     "application": [
       "rw"
     ],
     "name": "Seasonal variability",
     "connectorType": "wms",
     "provider":"wms",
     "connectorUrl":"http://gis-gfw.wri.org/arcgis/rest/services/prep/nex_gddp_indicators/MapServer/6?f=pjson"
   }
 }
'
```

To create a dataset using WMS as data source, you should provide the following data:

Field           | Description                                                                            | Example value  |
--------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: | ------------:  |
`connectorType` | The type of connector. Must be set to `wms`.                                           | `wms`          |
`provider`      | The provider should be set to `wms`.                                                   | `wms`          |

> `connectorUrl`  | URL of the server hosting the data in WMS format.                                      | http://gis-gfw.wri.org/arcgis/rest/services/prep/nex_gddp_indicators/MapServer/6?f=pjson |

Reviewer 3: The given URL is wrong, you actually reference an ArcGIS feature layer.

The WMS endpoint for this service would be `http://gis-gfw.wri.org/arcgis/services/prep/nex_gddp_indicators/MapServer/WMSServer/?request=GetCapabilities&service=WMS` 

It might be better to use a different service as example ie `https://maps.heigit.org/osm-wms/service?request=GetCapabilities&service=WMS`

Also need to clarify what URL pattern/ request type we need to use (ie do we need to add the `request` and `service` query params?). As far as I remember, you can enter any URL (even https://google.com). The service does not validate it.

Reviewer 2: Updated the example URL, thanks.

As for validation: none is done, this is pointed out a couple of lines below. There seems to be no query support for WMS datasets, nor is there a MS to support this type of dataset, so it's not clear who/which MS uses these datasets, and what's the expectation there.

Reviewer 3: ok, thanks for clarifying. I could imagine, they are used for layers. Maybe something we can clarify further down the road.

- All data uploaded to the RW API will be publicly visible and available to other users. 

The first thing to consider when creating a dataset is where your data currently is - this will determine the [Dataset provider](#dataset-providers) you will need to use and, with it, a set of things you need to take into account - we'll cover each provider in detail shortly. When building your request to the RW API to create your dataset, you will need to take into account both the general details that follow, plus the details for the `provider` you are using. Be sure to review both sections when creating your datasets, to avoid any pitfalls.

Creating a dataset is done using a POST request and passing the relevant data as body files. The supported body fields are as defined on the [dataset reference](#dataset-reference) section, but the minimum field list you must specify for all datasets is:

- name
- application
- connectorType
- provider 

Additionally, depending on the data provider you will be using, other fields may be required - we'll cover those in detail in each provider's specific documentation.

> // TODO: move down to providers

Reviewer: Just wanted to flag that this big todo is still here

Reviewer 2: Actually this is done, removing the TODO note

OK
```

Flushes the cache for the specified dataset. Take into account that only the dataset itself, query results and fields will be flushed. Any other relation, like metadata, layers or widgets linked to the specified dataset will not be affected by this action.

*Note: Flushing a dataset's cache requires authentication by an ADMIN user.*

> ### Recover

Reviewer: Clears what errors? What errors can a dataset have?

curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/06c44f9a-aae7-401e-874c-de13b7764959?includes=metadata,vocabulary,widget,layer
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get a specific dataset directly using its `id`.
```

## Getting multiple datasets by ids

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get multiple datasets by `id` using the `/find-by-ids` endpoint. To specify which endpoints to retrieve, post a JSON object in the body of the request in the following format:
```json
{
    "ids": [
        "id1", "id2"
    ]
}
```
```

To create a dataset, you will need to be authenticated. Additionally, your user account needs to be associated with all `application` you specify for the dataset.

> You must provide all of the required fields in the request body. The fields that compose a dataset are:

Reviewer: I would split this table into required attributes and optional attributes just so it's not so big and confusing. For attributes that are specific to different providers (`connectorUrl`, `tableName`, etc.), omit them and note in the `provider` description to see below for details on the different providers.

*Notice: If you want to create a dataset from a file you have, but that it's not available on a public URL, check out our docs for [uploading a dataset](#uploading-a-dataset).

  
Unlike with other dataset types, when the dataset is created, the data is copied from the provided source into the API's internal Elasticsearch instance, which is the source used for subsequent queries or other operations. This has a few implications that you should be aware of:

- The URLs provided in `sources` or `connectorUrl` will be publicly visible to all RW API users.
- On dataset creation, those URLs will be visited as the API loads and copies your data.
- Queries to the dataset will use the API's internal copy of your data. If you wish to update that data, see the documentation below on how to update your data.
- If the URLs provided become unavailable after the creation process is over, the dataset will continue to work normally - your data will still be available online.

> 

Reviewer 3: If the source dataset at the URL provided changes, the dataset will remain unchanged, unless the `sync` parameter is set

Reviewer 2: while that's correct, I dont think we need to change the info here:
- sync is disabled by default, so let's assume that whoever uses it read the docs beforehand
- the sole purpose of sync is updating the data
- sync uses its own url, not the url provided here.

- The `sources` field expects a list of URL containing files in the format matching your `provider` value. This is the recommended way of uploading data.
- The `connectorUrl` field is similar to `sources`, but it only accepts a single value. **Deprecation notice**: The previously used `connectorUrl` field should be considered deprecated when creating document-based datasets.
- If creating a dataset based on JSON data, you can upload the data on the actual request you issue to the API, inside the `data` field.

The data passed in `sources` or `connectorUrl` must be available on a publicly accessible URLs, specified in the `sources` array field or the `connectorUrl` single value field. The URLs must be an accessible CSV, TSV or XML file, non-compressed - zip, tar, tar.gz, etc are not supported. `sources` allows you to specify multiple URLs for a single dataset, provided all files have the same format and data structure. This is particularly useful when creating very large datasets, as it will allow the creation process to be parallelized. No warranties are provided about the order in which the files or their parts are imported.

> *Notice: If you want to create a file from a file you have, but that it's not available on a public URL, check out our docs for [uploading a dataset](#uploading-a-dataset).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Notice: If you want to create a dataset from a file you have, but that it's not available on a public URL, check out our docs for [uploading a dataset](#uploading-a-dataset).
```

}'
```

> To create a dataset connected to a CartoDB data source, you should provide the following data:

Reviewer: These provider-specific tables are great.

-F dataset=@<your-file>
```

> Example response

```json
{
  "connectorUrl": "rw.dataset.raw/some-file.csv",
  "fields": [
    "Country (region)",
    "Positive affect",
    "Negative affect",
    "Social support",
    "Freedom",
    "Corruption",
    "Generosity"
  ]
}
```

> Using the returned connectorUrl to create a new dataset

```shell
curl -X POST https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <your-token>" \
-H "Content-Type: application/json"
'{
  "dataset": {
    "connectorType":"document",
    "provider":"csv",
    "connectorUrl":"rw.dataset.raw/some-file.csv",
    "application":[
     "your", "apps"
    ],
    "name":"Example RAW Data Dataset"
  }
}'
```

The `upload` endpoint allows you to create datasets on the API from local files that aren't available online. 
If your file is up to 4MB in size, you can upload it to the API by using the `upload` endpoint. 
This endpoint accepts a file in the "dataset" field of your POST request, and a `provider` that matches your file type and extension. 

> The supported formats/extensions are: csv, json, tsv, xml, tif, tiff and geo.tiff.

Reviewer 3: Where are tif/ tiff/ geo.tiff files stored? Not in Elastic Search I assume.

Reviewer 2: No, these are related to rasdaman datasets, not document

Reviewer 3: Then I wouldn't list them here. Since they are not supported by the document connector

400            | - dataset: file too large -  | Your file is larger than 4MB.
400            | - dataset: file <your file name> is bad file type. -  | The `provider` value must match the extension of the uploaded file.
401            | Unauthorized   | You need to be logged in to be able to upload a file.

## Updating a dataset

There are multiple options to update a dataset, depending on what modification you are trying to achieve, and the underlying data provider of the dataset itself. This section covers the different endpoints that allow you to modify a dataset, their details, and helps you pick the option that best fits your scenario. We recommend reviewing all of them before proceeding, so you can find the endpoint that best matches your needs.

### Updating the fields of a dataset

> Example request for updating the name of a dataset

```shell
curl -X PATCH https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/<dataset-id-or-slug> \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <your-token>" \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" -d \
'{
    "name": "Another name for the dataset"
}'
```

> In order to modify the fields of a dataset, you can use the patch dataset endpoint. This endpoint allows you to modify most of your dataset's details, like the name or publishing status, but can also be used to modify internal fields of a dataset, like `connectorType`. When making these changes, be mindful that some of these fields are critical to the correct behavior of the dataset, and providing incorrect values may break your dataset. There are other endpoints documented in this page that allow you to perform certain update-like operations (ie. update data on a document-type dataset), so refer to those first before using this endpoint. Also important to keep in mind is the fact that this endpoint does not perform validation on things like `connectorUrl`/`sources` URLs.

Reviewer 3: Will patching a dataset trigger any event other than updating the database record?

Reviewer 2: The only event I could think of would be updating the data on a document-based dataset, and that's covered in the docs as something that doesnt happen. What other events did you have in mind?

-F dataset=@<your-file>
```

> Example response

```json
{
  "connectorUrl": "rw.dataset.raw/some-file.csv",
  "fields": [
    "Country (region)",
    "Positive affect",
    "Negative affect",
    "Social support",
    "Freedom",
    "Corruption",
    "Generosity"
  ]
}
```

> Using the returned connectorUrl to create a new dataset

```shell
curl -X POST https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <your-token>" \
-H "Content-Type: application/json"
'{
  "dataset": {
    "connectorType":"document",
    "provider":"csv",
    "connectorUrl":"rw.dataset.raw/some-file.csv",
    "application":[
     "your", "apps"
    ],
    "name":"Example RAW Data Dataset"
  }
}'
```

> If you want to upload your file the API as a dataset, but don't have it available online, the `upload` endpoint allows you to. If your file is up to 4MB in size, you can upload it to the API by using the `upload` endpoint. This endpoint accepts a file in the "dataset" field of your POST request, and a `provider` that matches your file type and extension. The supported formats/extensions are: csv, json, tsv, xml, tif, tiff and geo.tiff. The request uploads the file to the API, and returns a specially crafted `connectorUrl` value, and a list of fields found in your file. With this data, you can create a document type dataset by passing it to the `connectorUrl` value of a [new document type dataset](#document-based-datasets-json-csv-tsv-or-xml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `upload` endpoint allows you to create datasets on the API from local files that aren't available online. If your file is up to 4MB in size, you can upload it to the API by using the `upload` endpoint. This endpoint accepts a file in the "dataset" field of your POST request, and a `provider` that matches your file type and extension. The supported formats/extensions are: csv, json, tsv, xml, tif, tiff and geo.tiff. The request uploads the file to the API, and returns a specially crafted `connectorUrl` value, and a list of fields found in your file. With this data, you can create a document type dataset by passing it to the `connectorUrl` value of a [new document type dataset](#document-based-datasets-json-csv-tsv-or-xml).
```

-H "Content-Type: application/json" -d \
'{
  "dataset": {
    "datasetUrl": "/query/5306fd54-df71-4e20-8b34-2ff464ab28be?sql=select%20%2A%20from%20data%20limit%2010",
    "application": [
      "your",
      "apps"
    ],
    "legend": {...},
    "applicationConfig" : {...}
  }
}'
```

This endpoint allows you to create a new, json based dataset, from the result of a RW API endpoint call. The basic usage example would be to create a new dataset based on a custom query to an existing dataset - this is illustrated in the example `curl` call in this section. Other use cases could be converting the result of an analysis endpoint into a dataset, or capturing the result of a query to a REST based dataset (cartodb, arcgis, etc) to an internal json representation of the same data, that is kept in the API database.   

In order to perform this operation, the following conditions must be met:

- the user must belong to the applications specified in the request body.
- the user must be logged in and match one of the following:
  - have role `ADMIN`
  - have role `MANAGER` and be the dataset's owner (through the `userId` field of the dataset)

The request requires two fields to be present:

> - `datasetUrl`: the URL from where to load the data to populate the new dataset. Must be RW API, relative path, like `/query/5306fd54-df71-4e20-8b34-2ff464ab28be?sql=select%20%2A%20from%20data%20limit%2010`.

Reviewer 3: I assume the query dataset id must be the same as the dataset you want to clone?

Reviewer 2: so there seems to be a bug in this endpoint preventing me from testing it, but no, there's no restriction there, AFAICT. It just needs to be a relative (to the API) URL, and return a JSON. You could pass it `/dataset` and theoretically (and pagination aside) it should create a dataset containing a list of the datasets that exist on the api #datasetception

provider     | The type of provider for this dataset.                            | String | `csv`, `tsv`, `json` or `xml` | Yes
sources      | List of URLs from which to source data                            |  Array |     URL array | Yes, unless JSON data is provided using the `data` field
data         | JSON DATA only for json connector if connectorUrl not present     |  Array |    [{},{},{}] | Yes for JSON if `sources` is not present
legend       | See section below                                                 | Object |               |       No
connectorUrl | URL from which to source data. **Deprecated: use `sources` instead** | String |        URL |       No

**Deprecation notice: The previously used `connectorUrl` field should be considered deprecated when creating document-based datasets.**

*Note 1: Remember that creating datasets requires authentication.*

*Note 2: When creating a document-based dataset, if any of the fields has a numerical name (for example, column: `3`), a string named `col_` will be appended to the beginning of the name of the column. This way, an uploaded column named `3` will become `col_3`.*

> #### Legend

Reviewer: Does this only apply to document-based datasets? Would clarify that.

}'
```

> Using this endpoint, you can add completely replace the data of an already existing dataset. It's exclusively available for document based datasets - you'll get a `404` error if you use it on a dataset of a different type. All previously existing data will be permanently deleted. You can either provide the URL(s) for the file(s) containing the data you wish to add, or simply provide that data in the body of your request, as a JSON object. There are no requirements regarding similarity of the data structure between existing and new data - your overwrite data can have a completely different data schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this endpoint, you can add or completely replace the data of an already existing dataset. It's exclusively available for document based datasets - you'll get a `404` error if you use it on a dataset of a different type. All previously existing data will be permanently deleted. You can either provide the URL(s) for the file(s) containing the data you wish to add, or simply provide that data in the body of your request, as a JSON object. There are no requirements regarding similarity of the data structure between existing and new data - your overwrite data can have a completely different data schema.
```

403            | Forbidden      | You are trying to update a dataset with one or more `application` values that are not associated with your user account. 
404            | Endpoint not found  | A dataset with the provided id does not exist, or does not have `connectorType` with value `document`.
409            | Dataset locked. Overwrite false. | The dataset you're trying to modify has `overwrite` value set to `false`, to explicitly prevent data modifications.

Use this endpoint when:

- Fully replacing the data of an existing document based dataset, while keeping other values like id or name.
- Modifying the structure of the data for a document based dataset.

## Cloning a dataset

> Example request for cloning a dataset

```shell
curl -X POST https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/5306fd54-df71-4e20-8b34-2ff464ab28be/clone \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <your-token>"
-H "Content-Type: application/json" -d \
'{
  "dataset": {
    "datasetUrl": "/query/5306fd54-df71-4e20-8b34-2ff464ab28be?sql=select%20%2A%20from%20data%20limit%2010",
    "application": [
      "your",
      "apps"
    ],
    "legend": {...},
    "applicationConfig" : {...}
  }
}'
```

> This endpoint allows you to create a new, json based dataset, from the result of a RW API endpoint call. The basic usage example would be to create a new dataset based on a custom query to an existing dataset - this is illustrated in the example `curl` call in this section. Other use cases could be converting the result of an analysis endpoint into a dataset, or capturing the result of a query to a REST based dataset (cartodb, arcgis, etc) to an internal json representation of the same data, that is kept in the API database.   

Reviewer: Why just json based?

Reviewer 2: This endpoint is meant to create a dataset based on the output of other endpoints of the API - the great majority of which return a JSON. This dataset being a json is basically a way for the API to parse it's own output

Reviewer: Okay I think that could use some clarification. Maybe a hypothetical example?

Reviewer 2: let's say you have a dataset with id "12345", called "population per country" with 200 or so rows, one per country. Now let's say we're want to create a new dataset, that only contains the top 5 countries of those 200 or so. You'd use the clone with a body roughly like so:

`{
  "dataset": {
    "datasetUrl": "/query/12345?sql=select * from data order by population desc limit 5",
    "application": [
      "gfw"
    ],
    "legend": {...},
    "applicationConfig" : {...}
  }
}`
'
This would give you a new dataset. Internally, the clone endpoint calls `https://api.resourcewatch.org/query/12345?sql=select * from data order by population desc limit 5` which returns a json, then feeds that to a "create new dataset" POST call. It's JSON because `https://api.resourcewatch.org/query/12345?sql=select * from data order by population desc limit 5` outputs a JSON, like most other API calls.

- the user must be logged in and belong to the same application as the dataset
- the user must match one of the following:
  - have role `ADMIN`
  - have role `MANAGER` and be the dataset's owner (through the `userId` field of the dataset)

> Example request for deleting a dataset

```shell
curl -X DELETE https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/<dataset-id> \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <your-token>"
-H "Content-Type: application/json"
```

Error code     | Error message  | Description
-------------- | -------------- | --------------
400            | Dataset is protected | You are attempting to delete a dataset that has `protected` set to prevent deletion.
401            | Unauthorized   | You need to be logged in to be able to delete a dataset.
403            | Forbidden      | You need to either have the `ADMIN` role, or have role `MANAGER` and be the dataset's owner (through the `userId` field of the dataset)
403            | Forbidden      | You are trying to delete a dataset with one or more `application` values that are not associated with your user account. 
404            | Dataset with id <id> doesn't exist   | A dataset with the provided id does not exist.

> ## Dataset automatic synchronization

Reviewer: Is `sync` just an optional field in the dataset creation process? If so, I think this should be moved to the dataset creation section. Or it should at least be made clear that this is something you do at dataset creation time (or with a PATCH later).

Reviewer 2: yeah, I thought about that too. My reasoning behind having this in a separate section is that it's an optional and complex feature. So, in the spirit of compartmentalizing this, as well as keeping the create section as short and simple as possible, I left this here.

Perhaps a good middle ground would be to have a "hey, we have this cool feature below, check it out if you are interested" link here from the create/update endpoints?

Reviewer: Sure, that makes sense.

Reviewer 2: added said notes to create, concat and overwrite docs.

## Uploading a Dataset (Binary)

> > Upload raw data for using in a dataset

Reviewer: I'm confused as to how this relates to the "Creating a dataset" section above. Reading the example code makes it clearer, but could use more description.

subscribable        | Available dataset queries for subscriptions parameters accepted: `{{begin}}` for date begin and `{{end}}` for date end |  Object | `{" <queryname>": "<querybodytemplate>"}` |
env                 | The environment you want the dataset to be accessible on. Defaults to production |  Text | `staging`, `production` or `preproduction` |

*Note 1: Updating a dataset requires authentication.*

Note 2: When updating the `env` property of a dataset the change will cascade down to all associated layer and widget entities.

## Deleting a Dataset

> Example request for deleting a dataset

```shell
curl -X DELETE https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/<dataset-id> \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <your-token>"
-H "Content-Type: application/json"
```

In order to delete a dataset, the following conditions must be met:

- the dataset's `protected` property must be set to `false`.
- the user must be logged in and belong to the same application as the dataset
- the user must match one of the following:
  - have role `ADMIN`
  - have role `MANAGER` and be the dataset's owner (through the `userId` field of the dataset)

> **When a dataset is deleted, the user's applications that were present on the dataset will be removed from it. If this results in a dataset without applications, the dataset itself will be then deleted.**

Reviewer: I'm confused by this. Are we talking about how _other_ datasets might get deleted?

The automatic synchronization mechanism is available for document based datasets only, and you can configure it when [creating](#creating-a-dataset) or [updating](#updating-the-fields-of-a-dataset) a dataset. When enabled, it will schedule an automatic, periodic task, that will update your document based dataset's data, based on data from an URL you provide. This means that, once configured, you just have to make sure the automatic synchronization mechanism can find the newest version of the data at the specified URL, and the RW API will take care of the actual data update process for you.

> To enable automatic synchronization, you need to pass a `sync` object on your calls to the respective endpoints, next to the other fields. See the included example for a clearer idea of how creating a dataset with automatic synchronization looks like.

Reviewer: What respective endpoints?

Reviewer 2: will clarify, thanks!

There are 3 fields, all required, that you need to specify inside the `sync` object:

- `action`: choose either `concat` or `overwrite`. See more details above about [concatenating](#concatenate-and-append-data-to-a-document-based-dataset) and [overwriting](#overwrite-data-for-a-document-based-dataset) dataset data. Append operations, as documented in the section above, is not supported.
- `cronPattern`: [cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) expression representing when and how frequently the synchronization process should take place. The host executing these tasks use UTC timezone.
- `url`: publicly available URL from where the automatic synchronization mechanism will load the data to replace/concatenate to your dataset. 

> Keep in mind that, like their manual counterparts, modifications to a dataset done by the automatic synchronization mechanism will be blocked if a dataset's `overwrite` is set to true. This can be a silent blocker to your automatic synchronization process, but also intentionally used to block it, for example, should you want to prevent automatic updates for a brief period of time.

Reviewer: What happens when something goes wrong? Is there an error status on the dataset object or something?

Reviewer 2: I'll clarify this in my upcoming commit, let me know if it answers your question, or if we need to iterate on it again.

> ## Flush dataset cache

Reviewer: Could use some additional description on the caching logic in general. Even something as simple as, "Certain operations, like queries, are cached to improve performance."

Reviewer 2: I'll add a "TODO" on the before you get started section. While I agree with adding more details here, I also think this should build on top of a central cache dedicated section of the docs, that covers caching as a whole throughout the API, and then we can talk specifics in each section.

404            | Dataset with id <id> doesn't exist   | A dataset with the provided id does not exist.

## Recover

> Recover dataset

```shell
curl -X POST https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/0c630feb-8146-4fcc-a9be-be5adcb731c8/recover \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <your-token>"
```

> Response:

```shell
OK
```

Resets a dataset's `status` to `saved` and clears its errors. Keep in mind that this does NOT modify the dataset in any other way - if the underling dataset's data was inconsistent for any reason, this endpoint will not change it, and it's up to you to fix it using a `data-overwrite` or other endpoints.

In order to recover a dataset, the user must be logged in and have the `ADMIN` role.

#### Errors for recovering a dataset's cache

Error code     | Error message  | Description
-------------- | -------------- | --------------
401            | Unauthorized   | You need to be logged with to be able to delete a dataset.
403            | Forbidden      | You need to have the `ADMIN` role.
404            | Dataset with id <id> doesn't exist   | A dataset with the provided id does not exist.

  

> ## Dataset reference

Reviewer: Is sync missing from this list?

Reviewer 2: no, sync data is not saved in the model

}'
```

> This endpoint returns a new dataset that is a replica of the dataset provided. It can take the optional query parameter `fullCloning=true` to force the cloning of the metadata.

Reviewer: Confused as to what happens when `fullCloning=false`. What doesn't get cloned by default?

Reviewer 2: hopefully this is clearer in the latest version of the docs

----------------- | :--------------------------------------------------- | ------: | ------------: | ----------: |
datasetUrl        | The connectorUrl for the new dataset.                |    Text | A valid URL   | Yes         |
application       | A list of the new dataset applications.              |   Array | Any valid application name(s) | Yes |
legend            | Legend for the dataset. If provided, it will override the original dataset values. |  Object | "legend": {"long": "123", "lat": "123", "country": ["pais"], "region": ["barrio"], "date": ["startDate", "endDate"]}} |
applicationConfig | Group of relevant props of a widget. If provided, it will override the original dataset values. |   Array | Any Text      |

The cloned dataset has the same attributes as the source one, except for the following ones:

* `name`: The current timestamp is added to the original dataset's name.
* `published`: will be false unless specified in the request body.

The field `clonedHost` will contain the host information about the original dataset.

*Note: Cloning a dataset requires authentication, and you will only be able to clone datasets from apps associated to your user.*

> ## Concatenate and Append Data

Reviewer: Does this only work for document based datasets? Can I mix formats (like append JSON to a CSV dataset)?

}'
```

> Using this endpoint, you can add completely replace the data of an already existing dataset. All previously existing data will be permanently deleted. You can either provide the URL(s) for the file(s) containing the data you wish to add, or simply provide that data in the body of your request, as a JSON object. There are no requirements regarding similarity of the data structure between existing and new data - your overwrite data can have a completely different data schema.

Reviewer: Why can't I do this in a normal PATCH operation?
What happens to the old file in S3?

    }
}'
```

> To sync the data of a dataset, you need to choose the action type (concat or overwrite), a cron pattern and a valid url. This configuration should be set in the 'sync' property when creating or updating a document dataset.

Reviewer: What does syncing mean here? I'm not sure what this operation actually does.
